<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"  xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Book of Texas</title>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<section id="part1_chap3" epub:type="chapter"><span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page28" title="28"/>
<div class="chapterbox">
	<h2 class="chap">CHAPTER III<br /><span class="chapname">Peaceful Development</span></h2>
	<aside class="epigraph" epub:type="epigraph">
		<p class="poem1">&#x201C;Brave old Mackenzie long has laid him down</p>
		<p class="poem1">To rest beside the trail that bears his name.</p>
		<p class="poem1">A granite mountain makes his monument;</p>
		<p class="poem1">The northers, moaning o&#x2019;er the low divide.</p>
		<p class="poem1">Go gently past his long-deserted camps.</p>
		<p class="poem1">No more his rangers guard the far frontier;</p>
		<p class="poem1">No more he leads them in the border fights;</p>
		<p class="poem1">No more the mavericks&#x2019; winding stream of horns</p>
		<p class="poem1">To Kansas bound; the dust, the cowboy songs</p>
		<p class="poem1">And cries, the pistol&#x2019;s sharp report; the free,</p>
		<p class="poem1">Wild days in Texas by the Rio Grande.&#x201D;</p>
		<p class="poem4 source">&#x2014;Border Ballad.</p>
	</aside>
</div>
<p class="first"><span class="dropcap">T</span><span class="leadin">he story of the state&#x2019;s growth</span> since the days of reconstruction is reflected in other chapters in this volume, and is not greatly dissimilar to that of other Southern states; for, while preserving much of the spirit of the old South, Texas is really a Western state. The problems Texans are called on to solve are alike throughout the West. Following the war came immigrants in ever-increasing numbers; the era of the small farmer was ushered in; railroads were built; towns began to put on city airs; the long period of quiet, which yet continues, gave the people an opportunity to examine themselves, instead of watching the man outside, and to determine what was best for the state and for themselves. Frontier protection against the Indians and outlaws, the development of an efficient system of public education, the distribution of an immense public domain, <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page29" title="29"/>the proper control of public service corporations, the establishment of a system of courts, problems of public finance, the labor movement, the granger movement, the prohibition question&#x2014;all these matters, and many others, have been discussed by the press, on the hustings, and by the fireside, though the demands of this chapter require only a few to be mentioned.</p>
<p class="ind">Governor Richard Coke was authorized in 1874 to equip a battalion of mounted men of six companies of seventy-five men each, for protecting the frontier against Indians, Mexicans, or other desperadoes. This body of men came to be known as Texas Rangers, and is still provided for, although its numbers have been greatly reduced. Acting both as a peace officer and as a military man, the ranger, who is usually chosen for his courage, horsemanship, and ability to shoot straight and to shoot quick, has exercised an important influence in extending the frontier boundaries of Texas. Where the ranger camped the settler was not afraid to follow close at his heels, for the wild man and the bad man and the mad man fled as the ranger approached. When Mr. Roosevelt got ready to organize his regiment of Rough Riders in the Spanish-American War, he came to San Antonio, Texas, in the heart of the ranger country, in order to be convenient to the class of men that he wished to lead against the Spaniards. He once said of &#x201C;Bill&#x201D; McDonald, a prominent ranger captain and now United States Marshal for the Northern District of Texas, that this particular individual would take pleasure in charging hell armed only with a bucket of water. The ranger service in Texas is under the immediate control of the Adjutant-General of the state. The men are divided into <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page30" title="30"/>four or five small companies which for a number of years have been kept camped in the different parts of the Rio Grande country. Until recently the border counties between Oklahoma and Texas were in as great need of protection as the Rio Grande region.</p>
<p class="ind">Governor Charles Culberson, in his message to the legislature dated January 16, 1895, said: &#x201C;It has become common for the Government to aid certain classes of industries by bounties, protection, and other species of unequal laws, and under this impetus individual fortunes have grown to such gigantic proportions that conservative and thoughtful men are appalled at the enlarging power of concentrated capital.&#x201D; In Texas the operations and results of bounty giving was illustrated most exasperatingly by the railroads. The railroads had been needed to develop the country, but it cannot be doubted that in many cases, at least, high prices were paid for them. The total bounties in land to the railroads in the state amounted to 39,000,800 acres, 22 per cent. of the total acreage of the state, an area equal to the entire State of New York. About a third of this, however, was eventually forfeited back to the state. Too late the people came to see that the railroads had cost perhaps too much. Their practical freedom from all laws, their immense wealth, and the ease with which their interests could be combined made railroad men of the Jay Gould type careless of the wishes or the rights of the people. Big competing lines, therefore, suspended all competition and formed combinations in disregard of the law. Watered stocks were issued by the millions. High rates, special rates, rebates, and poor service characterized every road <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page31" title="31"/>in Texas. To bolster up such indefensible practices free passes were issued to every officeholder in Texas whose functions could in the slightest way embarrass the railroads in their exercise of arbitrary powers. Governor Hogg, who from the late eighties led in the fight against unjust practices of the railroads, said in an address in 1901: &#x201C;I proved by the railway officials that the railway line from Jefferson to Greenville cost its owners $7,000 a mile to build it; that they got from the state 10,240 acres of land to the mile; that they sold this land for more than enough to pay for building the road; that they issued $12,000 of bonds and stocks per mile on the road; that they ran it many years and maintained it in fine condition; that in 1880 they sold it to other parties for $9,000 in cash a mile, which included the stocks and bonds. The new purchasers immediately placed stocks and bonds on the road for $35,000 per mile, thus making a clean profit on the face of the transaction of $4,000,000. Later on the new management cut down the train and track service, reduced wages of the employees, and raised traffic rates out of reason; then within six or seven years it ran down the road from a good one to such a reckless state that no one could get an accident ticket over it.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="ind">It was Governor Hogg who, while Attorney-General of Texas, began to prosecute the railroad companies for violations of the law. He also fought for a law creating a Railroad Commission in Texas and finally saw it placed on the statute books in 1891. He then induced Senator John H. Reagan, who had framed the Interstate Commerce law for the United States, to resign as United States Senator and <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page32" title="32"/>become the first chairman of the Railroad Commission. This commission, with the power to classify freight and fix the rates for railroads and express companies, and with ample authority to enforce the obedience of the railroads, has exercised a great beneficial influence. Intrastate rates have been reduced and equalized, a good deal of water has been squeezed out of depreciated bonds, and the railroads forced to improve their roadbeds and rolling stock, and to build comfortable depots. &#x201C;The most important results,&#x201D; says Prof. Charles S. Potts, &#x201C;achieved by the state through the work of the Railroad Commission has been the almost complete abolition of discrimination between persons and places and of the fluctuations in rates due to competition and rate wars. Steady and uniform rates are of more assistance to the business community than low rates, and these two qualities have been secured in large measure as a result of the Commission&#x2019;s work.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="ind">To John H. Reagan, a notable figure in Southern as well as local state history, is most largely due the present standing of the Texas Railroad Commission; for it does yet stand high even though more than once positions on the commission have been attained by persons whose conspicuous fitness rested largely on their ability to employ political claptrap to mislead voters. But Reagan enjoyed the confidence and respect of all. He tried, while protecting the interests of the people, to treat the railroads fairly. He became known as the &#x201C;square deal&#x201D; man&#x2014;a title richly deserved.</p>
<p class="ind">Governor Hogg thought that the allied question of the unrestrained issuance of stocks and bonds by railway companies to be almost as important as the Railroad Commission issue. <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page33" title="33"/>He showed that the railroads had outstanding against them $455,000,000 in stocks and bonds, an amount equal to one-half of the value of all the property within the state, including the railways themselves. At the same time his exhibits proved that railways were rendered for taxation for $63,000,000 or about one-eighth of their indebtedness. Under the law passed as a result of this agitation the Railroad Commission was given power to regulate all future issues of stocks. &#x201C;The stock and bond law,&#x201D; says Professor Potts, &#x201C;has not only decreased the issuance of fictitious stocks and bonds, but has actually resulted in the decrease of the average amount of the outstanding securities per line of mile. This result is worthy of remembrance in view of the fact that the last twenty years has seen a marked increase of the outstanding capitalization on the other railroads in the United States. The average amount of capital stock per line of mile in Texas has been reduced from $15,000 in 1894 to $8,000 in 1913, or a decrease of more than 44 per cent. The bonded indebtedness per line of mile has been reduced from $25,700 per mile to $23,200, or a decrease in the mortgage debt of nearly 10 per cent. The total amount of both stocks and bonds has been reduced from $40,800 in 1894 to $31,600 in 1913, or a reduction of more than 22 per cent.&#x201D; The average decrease in value is due both to the low valuation of new roads and to the fact that old roads, as their securities mature, are not allowed to bond again so freely.</p>
<p class="ind">It should not be forgotten that the regulation of railroads in Texas was instituted and finally effected largely through the persistent courage and forceful advocacy of one man&#x2014; <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page34" title="34"/>James Stephen Hogg. Even after he retired from the Governor&#x2019;s chair he continued to combat the evils which he thought were practised by the railroads. Because of his activity, comparatively few people in Texas travel on passes. One of his contentions&#x2014;namely, that unwarranted issues of stocks and bonds should be declared invalid&#x2014;has never been brought to pass. Other men have, of course, assisted in the work accomplished in Texas, but to Governor Hogg must in large measure be given the honor of relieving a situation that had become unbearably oppressive.</p>
<p class="ind">&#x201C;Next to the introduction of railroads,&#x201D; said Governor Roberts, &#x201C;barbed wire has done most to develop the agricultural and pastoral pursuits of the state.&#x201D; But barbed wire, as did the railroads, brought its troubles. The fencing of large bodies of land into one pasture by the cattleman &#x2014;and he not seldom fenced land other than his own&#x2014; brought irritation and discomfort to the small stock grower and to the farmer. Fence cutting became so common that Governor Ireland in 1884 convened the legislature in special session and passed laws against the fence cutters, which finally put an end to the practice.</p>
<p class="ind">The waste in disposing of the public lands of Texas was stopped in 1887 by a law which provided that farming land could be sold to actual settlers only, in amounts ranging from 160 acres to 640 acres. The terms were most liberal, and purchasers had forty years&#x2019; time to pay for their land, at an interest rate of 3 per cent., with only the first payment and the annual interest actually required until the end of the forty years&#x2019; period. At the same time each person was allowed to purchase four sections of grazing land in the <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page35" title="35"/>arid section of the state. Under the operation of this law less than 2,000,000 acres of public land in Texas remain unsold. This, however, does not include more than 2,000,000 acres yet held by the university, the most of which is leased to cattlemen for grazing purposes. Again, under the leadership of Governor Hogg, legislation was enacted affecting public lands held by large land corporations, many of them non-residents. In 1890 such corporations owned about 40,000,000 acres of Texas lands, or one-fourth of the entire state. A law was enacted prohibiting further acquisition of land by corporations, and requiring the lands then owned to be sold within fifteen years. The lands of refractory corporations were to be sold by judicial proceedings. A second act provided that no alien or person not a resident of the United States should thereafter acquire title to any Texas land, exception being made to lands in incorporated towns or cities.</p>
<p class="ind">Another subject that has agitated the minds of the people at different times is the question of state-wide prohibition. In 1887, after an exciting discussion in which the leading orators of the state were pitted against each other, the matter was voted upon. The result of the vote was 129,270 for and 220,627 against prohibition. Again, in the summer of 1911, the subject was submitted to popular vote. The debates, while vigorous, were more good-natured, the vote standing, for prohibition, 231,096, against prohibition, 237,363. At the present time, as for some years past, the prohibition question is recognized as the paramount issue in the Democratic party, the two leading candidates for Governor always occupying opposite sides on this question, <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page36" title="36"/>with the prohibitionists seemingly gaining steadily in numbers. The present Governor, James E. Ferguson, announced as a prominent plank in his platform that he would veto any liquor legislation, pro or anti, passed by the legislature. The people vindicated his judgment that they were weary of having the prohibition question a factor in state politics, for he was triumphantly elected, and the succeeding legislature was remarkably free from heated discussion growing out of this question. Nor was the Governor called upon to make his word good, as he without doubt would have done.</p>
<p class="ind">That local option sentiment is growing becomes more apparent if one studies the increase in the number of counties voting local option. At the present time 186 of the 252 counties are entirely &#x201C;dry,&#x201D; while 49 are partly &#x201C;dry.&#x201D; Probably 70 per cent. of the people live under well-enforced local option laws. A general law provides that no intoxicating liquors can be sold or drunk on a railroad train in Texas; a 9:30 closing law is very generally observed, and a Sunday closing law is strictly enforced.</p>
<p class="ind">One of the relics of radical rule days was a public debt of $5,000,000 which, through the business acumen of Governor Roberts, was either settled or comfortably funded. Governor Roberts was also at the head of the commission that built the present state capitol, said to be at the time of its erection one of the six largest buildings in the world. It cost the State of Texas three million acres of land, and is 560 feet long by 280 feet broad. When the Spanish-American War broke out Texas sent to the front, or as far to the front as they could get, five regiments of infantry and <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page37" title="37"/>one of cavalry. In addition a lot of her cowboys and college students joined Mr. Roosevelt&#x2019;s Rough Riders when that noted organization was formed in San Antonio.</p>
<p class="ind">During the last twenty years Texas has suffered considerably by storms and floods. In the matter of flood rivers the Brazos is the worst offender. In the summer of 1889, again in 1902, and still again in 1913, this river overflowed its banks, along which, especially below Waco, there lies some of the finest cotton acreage in the world. Frequent floods have, however, taught the people the value of levees. Under special legislation levee districts have been formed in many localities, levee bonds voted, and much valuable land afforded protection. Galveston has been the chief sufferer by storms. The first one came in 1900, destroying 6,000 lives and millions of dollars&#x2019; worth of property. Again, in 1915, another terrific storm swept the coast, bringing almost as heavy loss of property, but destroying only a few lives. The great Galveston sea wall, built partly by the courageous people of that city and partly by the National Government, held staunchly, and the city was saved.</p>
<p class="ind">Out of the first Galveston disaster came at least one blessing&#x2014;the commission form of government&#x2014;which has not only been adopted by practically every important incorporated town in Texas, but also by many other cities of the United States. R. Waverley Smith, a banker and lawyer of Galveston, conceived the commission idea for city government. He, with others, realized, after the calamitous storm, that a small, efficient group of men could best do the work of rebuilding a stricken city. Under the <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page38" title="38"/>prevailing system incompetent, perhaps venal, persons could be elected. The experiment was suggested by the dire necessities of the situation, and Mr. Smith drafted that section of a new charter which gave extraordinary powers to five men. The legislature granted the charter after declining to approve the provision allowing the Governor to appoint the commission. Under its operation all powers of the city are placed in the hands of five men selected by a popular vote. The commission plan of city government, organized and first tried out thoroughly in Texas, seems destined to be as widely copied as her homestead law.</p>
<p class="ind">Since the time of Governor Hogg the people of Texas, except in the matter of the prohibition question, have not been greatly agitated about matters of state reform. They have paid more attention to national issues, such as free silver, imperialism, and our relations to Mexico, than to state problems. Questions of court procedure, judicial reform, public education, public health, improvement of public buildings and public roads, the introduction of manufacturing enterprises, the price of cotton, cooperative marketing, rural credits, tenantry, etc., have interested special groups at different times, and some of these problems are still far from solution; but the larger body of the people have not become excited over any one or combination of them. It may be safely said that the people of Texas generally believe that the United States should intervene in the Mexican situation, but there are really very few who favor this intervention should it require force of arms. The reputed warlike spirit of Texas is largely the work of imaginative <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page39" title="39"/>newspaper correspondents or the irresponsible utterances of ambitious politicians.</p>
<p class="ind">These annals are confessedly incomplete. Other chapters give details of some of the things that it was necessary to omit. From the Civil War period down to the present the state has been blessed with peace and prosperity. Its growth in population, in enlightenment, and in wealth, has been rapid and continuous. There is yet room for more people, and they are coming by trainloads. Texas is no paradise, but it is a good place to live in. Its history has been eventful and honorable. Its future, who can prophesy?</p>
</section>

</body>
</html>
