<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"  xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Book of Texas</title>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<section id="part2_chap2" epub:type="chapter"><span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page52" title="52"/>
<div class="chapterbox">
	<h2 class="chap">CHAPTER II<br /><span class="chapname">Their Nationality and Characteristics</span></h2>
	<aside class="epigraph" epub:type="epigraph">
		<p class="poem1">&#x201C;... the emigrants,</p>
		<p class="poem1">Who bore the westward fever in their brains,</p>
		<p class="poem1">The Norseman tang for roving in their veins,</p>
		<p class="poem1">Who loved the plains as sailors love the sea,</p>
		<p class="poem1">Braved danger, death, and found a resting place,</p>
		<p class="poem1">While traveling on the old Mackenzie trail.&#x201D;</p>
	</aside>
</div>
<p class="first"><span class="dropcap">E</span><span class="leadin">ven the Census Bureau</span> does not try to analyze fully the constituent elements of our complex population. In the case of Texas, as in the case of the whole United States, it is impossible to trace the exact proportion of Irish or English or German in the whole mass of inhabitants. It is desirable here, however, to get some idea of the elements that make up the present population of Texas, and for that purpose the table appearing on page 53 will be found useful.</p>
<p class="ind">Europeans, particularly Germans, are now coming in rather slowly, but Mexicans are coming into Texas in large but as yet uncounted numbers. The percentage of &#x201C;Mexicans born in Mexico&#x201D; just given is for this reason perhaps too small. The percentage of &#x201C;native Mexican Texans of Mexican Texan parentage&#x201D; is only an estimate. Newcomer Mexicans avoiding war-smitten Mexico are now swarming all over the northern side of the Rio Grande Valley. A heavy immigration of &#x201C;Americans&#x201D; from the other states is also helping to increase relatively the natives of the United States with native parents of <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page53" title="53"/>European descent. This element formed 63 per cent. of the total population in 1890, 64 per cent. in 1900, and 67 per cent. in 1910. Texas has gained from other states about 850,000, and has lost about 350,000 (more than half of them to Oklahoma), making a net gain of 500,000, only persons now alive being counted.</p>
<div class="table" id="table03">
<table>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <th colspan="2">TEXAS</th>
   <th colspan="3">UNITED<br/>STATES</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native white Texans of American parentage</td>
   <td class="right">46%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native white Texans, one or both parents born in Europe</td>
   <td class="right">5%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native white Texans</td>
   <td class="right">51%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native white Americans of American parentage</td>
   <td class="right">66%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">54%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native white Americans, one or both parents born in Europe</td>
   <td class="right">7%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">21%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native white Americans</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">73</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">75</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Foreign-born Europeans</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">3</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">14</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native Mexican Texans, of Mexican Texan parentage</td>
   <td class="right">2%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Native Mexican Texans, one or both parents born in Mexico</td>
   <td class="right">3%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Mexicans born in Mexico</td>
   <td class="right">3%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Mexicans</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">7</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Negroes born in Texas</td>
   <td class="right">15%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Negroes born in other states</td>
   <td class="right">2%</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td class="pop">Negroes</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">17</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="right">10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="total">100</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td>&#x00A0;</td>
   <td class="total">100</td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>
</div>
<p class="ind">It is clear that Texans stick pretty closely to Texas. The rather sudden opening up of Oklahoma to settlement after people were pretty thickly scattered around its borders caused, of course, a sudden draught that carried nearly 200,000 native Texans northward across Red River. In spite of this exodus, only one native Texan out of seven lives in the United States outside of Texas, and only one in <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page54" title="54"/>sixteen lives outside of Texas and Oklahoma. On the average in the United States, 22 per cent. of the natives of a state are living outside the state. Texans are beaten at this stay-at-home game only by Louisiana, Florida, and California, whose &#x201C;native sons&#x201D; have departed from their birthplaces to the extent of 13 per cent., 12 per cent., and 10 per cent. respectively. Poor Nevada has lost 52 per cent. of her children, and sits, a sort of weeping Niobe, among her stones.</p>
<p class="ind">About 51 per cent. of the total native population of Texas are white. About 15 per cent. of the total population are white Americans who are natives of other states. To this group Tennessee has contributed 127,000; Alabama, 110,000; Arkansas, 78,000; Mississippi, 77,000; Georgia, 63,000; Missouri, 57,000; Kentucky, 47,000; Louisiana, 42,000; Illinois, 34,000, and Oklahoma, 28,000.</p>
<p class="ind">In recent years immigration from the other Southern states has decreased, while that from the Northern states has increased. Texas is being invaded on one side by Mexicans, on the other by Yankees. It is easy for all sorts of people to discover that Texas is a good place to live.</p>
<p class="ind">As has already been said, it is impossible to determine with any accuracy the various foreign components of our complex population. If, as an approximation, we add together the number of foreign-born, the number of those both of whose parents are foreign-born, and the number of those one of whose parents is foreign-born, we find that about 5 per cent. of the total population is Mexican, 5 per cent. is German, and 5 per cent. is divided among all the other foreign nationalities. Since Mexicans and Germans have <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page55" title="55"/>been coming to Texas for a long time, the percentages they bear to the total population are, of course, somewhat larger than those just given. For example, many present-day Texans are the grandchildren of Germans. Certainly three million or more Texans are of purely European descent.</p>
<p class="ind">Counting Mexicans and Europeans together, we get, therefore, almost a sixth of the total population. Two-thirds of this foreign element are rural, one-third is urban; in numbers about 400,000 and 200,000 respectively. One-fifth of the total urban population and one-eighth of the total rural population is composed of this foreign element. In the whole United States half of the total urban and one-fifth of the total rural population is composed of foreigners. Both in town and country, therefore, Texas is much more American than the United States as a whole.</p>
<p class="ind">As is to be expected, there is a marked tendency on the part of the foreign element to cluster in certain districts. The Mexicans are naturally to be found mostly along the northern side of the Rio Grande. From San Antonio and El Paso southward and eastward Mexicans are to be found in considerable numbers and are spreading. The German population, which began coming in the late &#x201C;Forties,&#x201D; is mainly established between Austin and San Antonio and southeastward of these cities nearly to the Gulf. Of course there are many Germans in all the cities. The number of persons born in Germany and living in Texas is decreasing. The Austrian population (chiefly Bohemian) is mainly located in two settlement areas, the one composed of Lavaca and Fayette counties, the other of Williamson, Bell, and McLennan. The Bohemians are largely rural. <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page56" title="56"/>The Italians are pretty widely scattered, mainly in the cities, with rural settlements of about 1,600 in Brazos and about 900 in Erath County. The Swedes are largely rural and are clustered in Travis and Williamson counties, where there are more than 4,000, and in Wharton County, where there are several hundred. There are also several hundred in each of Galveston, Harris, and Tarrant counties.</p>
<p class="ind">There is a Norwegian colony in Bosque County. There are small colonies of various other nationalities scattered here and there. In each of the larger cities there are about four hundred French and one hundred Greeks. The latter are rapidly monopolizing the restaurant business. Of the 700 Indians, 200 are in Polk County, 200 in Kinney County, and the remaining 300 are widely scattered. Nearly half of the 600 Chinese are in El Paso, and the remainder are scattered mainly in the cities. Most of the 340 Japanese are in the coast country raising rice.</p>
<p class="ind"><span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page57" title="57"/>At present there is not much communication between <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page58" title="58"/>Texas and the other Gulf States, the main channels of trade running to St. Louis, Kansas City, and to the northeast rather than to New Orleans; nevertheless, so many Texans have come out of the South, including Missouri and Kentucky and Tennessee, that Texas is predominantly Southern in thought and feeling. She always &#x201C;rolls up&#x201D; a tremendous Democratic majority, the Democratic primaries are the real elections, and all the political issues that lead to active contests arise between different portions of the overwhelmingly preponderant Democracy. Prohibition has been the great dividing wedge, but numerous smaller rifts are to be discovered in the Democratic lute, from which, as a consequence, clear notes do not always issue. In spite of being Southern, Texas is quite different from the Southeastern States, due to a very large infusion of Westerners, of Germans, and of Mexicans. There is a decidedly Western and cosmopolitan &#x201C;feel.&#x201D; Nevertheless, a good deal of provincialism exists. Owing to lack of population to the south and west and northwest of Texas, and to the relative lack of intercourse with Louisiana and Arkansas, there is pretty close contact only with Oklahoma, which, after a fashion, is a part of Texas. Consequently Texas is somewhat off to herself, and this fact, coupled with her great area, causes the newspapers and public discussions in Texas to direct themselves more exclusively to the affairs of their own state than seems to be the case in the other states. In fact, Texans are prone to regard themselves as more different from the rest of the people of the United States than is really the case. &#x201C;The only difference between Texans and other people,&#x201D; says a cosmopolitan newcomer, <span class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page59" title="59"/>&#x201C;is that they think themselves different.&#x201D; Perhaps even in this respect there is no difference. Texans certainly possess some individuality, but no one as yet has successfully defined the Texas type, dividing it from the Southern on one side and the Western on the other. Until this is done we must regard the Texan as a chip of the old block. Speaking boastfully, and perhaps not untruthfully, we may ascribe to him the hospitality and the chivalry of the Southerner, the independence and the enterprise of the Westerner, and most of the other good qualities of each element in his complex ancestry. A highly favorable composite picture may be obtained in this way, but here and there exact truth will demand some retouching. Some of his food and nearly all of his clothes, his machinery, his games, his books, his magazines, and his new ideas he imports. Consequently he is very like other Americans. He is somewhat different from the New Englander and the New Yorker and a few others, but that is because they dwell on the periphery of the real United States and not between the Alleghenies and the Rockies, where, as President James of the University of Illinois says, the real and the major portion of the English language is going to be spoken in the twenty-first century. The Texan doesn&#x2019;t use the broad a nor refer to a girl as a &#x201C;gyurl&#x201D; nor a spoon as a &#x201C;spun.&#x201D; He is primarily Southern, secondarily Middle North American, and it takes a very careful observer to pick a Texan out of a group of miscellaneous Americans. Of course, if your Texan is talking about Texas, the most inexpert ethnologist in the world can spot him at once.</p>
</section>

</body>
</html>
