<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-us" xml:lang="en-us">
<head>
<title>The Book of Texas</title>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
<h1 class="fm">Glossary of People</h1>
<dl class="glossary">
	<dt id="g_austin" epub:type="glossterm">Stephen F. Austin</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">Stephen Fuller Austin (November 3, 1793 – December 27, 1836) was an American empresario born in Virginia and raised in southeastern Missouri. Known as the Father of Texas, he led the second, and ultimately successful, colonization of the region by bringing 300 families from the United States.</dd>
	<dt id="g_cabeza" epub:type="glossterm">Cabeza de Vaca</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca (Jerez de la Frontera, c. 1488/1490/1492 – Seville, c. 1557/1558/1559/1560) was a Spanish explorer of the New World, one of four survivors of the 1527 Narváez expedition. During eight years of traveling across the US Southwest, he became a trader and shaman to various Native American tribes before reconnecting with Spanish colonial forces in Mexico in 1536.</dd>
	<dt id="g_coronado" epub:type="glossterm">Coronado</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">Francisco Vázquez de Coronado y Luján (1510 – 22 September 1554) was a Spanish conquistador and explorer, who led a great expedition from Mexico to present-day Kansas through parts of southwestern United States between 1540 and 1542. Coronado had hoped to reach the mythical Seven Cities of Gold. His expedition discovered the Grand Canyon and the Colorado River.</dd>
	<dt id="g_hogg" epub:type="glossterm">James Hogg</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">James Stephen "Big Jim" Hogg (March 24, 1851 – March 3, 1906) was an American lawyer, doctor and statesman, and the 20th Governor of Texas. He was born near Rusk, Texas. Hogg was a follower of the conservative New South Creed which became popular following the U.S. Civil War, and was also associated with populism. He was the first Texas Governor to have been born in Texas.</dd>
	<dt id="g_houston" epub:type="glossterm">Sam Houston</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">Samuel "Sam" Houston (March 2, 1793 – July 26, 1863) was an American politician and soldier, best known for his role in bringing Texas into the United States as a constituent state. His victory at the Battle of San Jacinto secured the independence of Texas from Mexico.</dd>
	<dt id="g_lamar" epub:type="glossterm">Mirabeau B. Lamar</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">Mirabeau Buonaparte Lamar (August 16, 1798 – December 19, 1859) was a Texas politician, poet, diplomat and soldier who was a leading Texas political figure during the Texas Republic era. He was the third President of the Republic of Texas after Sam Houston (1836 as ad-interim president) and Sam Houston.</dd>
	<dt id="g_lasalle" epub:type="glossterm">La Salle</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, or Robert de La Salle (November 21, 1643 – March 19, 1687) was a French explorer. He explored the Great Lakes region of the United States and Canada, the Mississippi River, and the Gulf of Mexico.</dd>
	<dt id="g_reagan" epub:type="glossterm">John H. Reagan</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">John Henninger Reagan (October 8, 1818 – March 6, 1905) was an American politician from the U.S. state of Texas. A Democrat, Reagan resigned from the U.S. House of Representatives when Texas seceded from the Union and joined the Confederate States of America. He served in the cabinet of Jefferson Davis as Postmaster General. After the Confederate defeat, he called for cooperation with the federal government and thus became unpopular, but returned to public office when his predictions of harsh treatment for resistance were proved correct.</dd>
	<dt id="g_roberts" epub:type="glossterm">O. M. Roberts</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">Oran Milo Roberts (July 9, 1815 – May 19, 1898), was the 17th Governor of Texas from January 21, 1879 to January 16, 1883. he also served as Chief Justice of the Texas Supreme Court and as a law professor in the University of Texas.</dd>
	<dt id="g_travis" epub:type="glossterm">William Barret Travis</dt>
	<dd epub:type="glossdef">William Barret Travis (August 1, 1809 – March 6, 1836) was a 19th-century American lawyer and soldier. At the age of 26, he was a lieutenant colonel in the Texas Army. He died at the Battle of the Alamo during the Texas Revolution.</dd>
</dl>

</section>

</body>
</html>
